


The most striking thing about getting to know birds is feeling that they are simultaneously emotional individuals with personalities and dinosaurs.

Like all of the birds, Oakley usually looks at me with one eye. It seems that birds do this both because their eyes are not both at the front of their head. As he looks at me, his pupil will often dilate between a tiny, black pin-sized spot and hole the size of a marble. This quick dilation is what’s called eye pinning and its supposedly something that parrots do when they’re excited. 

Years of evolution and much time spent with dogs has made their behavior quite intuitive to me.  Eyes looking up while staying still, teeth bearing, fur standing on edge, these signals and many more make it clear to me when a dog is feeling unsafe, threatened, or aggressive. Similarly, when their happy and comfortable it’s usually clear. They’re muscles are relaxed, their tail may be wagging, they may be nuzzling and licking. By contrast, cats are a bit different. One second they may be liking the rub on the head and the next they mite claw or bite your hand, no longer satisfied with that kind of touch. My experience with parrots is closer to my experience with cats than my experience with dogs.One minute they may be into something and the next minute, they may not be. And so reading a parrot’s emotional state requires constant presence and attention.

Parrots’ body language is something that started off as quite foreign to me. What they do to communicate with their eyes and bodies is so different from the facial expressions and posture changes I make with mine. Unlike me, Oakley doesn’t have muscles to furrow his eye brows or turn his beak into a smile. Instead he has feathers which he can puff out or make smooth, wings which he can spread, eyes which can dilate, and a whole serious of jerky and ecstatic head movements and  dances which seem to communicate a wide array of emotions. 





This duality between how similar they seem to humans, how familiar they feel with their alien-ness (their hollow bones, their colorful feathers, their staccato movements) I find quite magical.

I’m struck by this duality when I’m hanging out with Oakley, a blue-and-gold macaw who lives at a parrot sanctuary.

I’m always excited to see Oakley. He’s the first parrot I visit when I arrive. I involuntarily coo at him as I walk by his perch and he often comes up towards the front , it seems, to greet me. 

I thought Oakley was just friendly to everyone until another volunteer at the sanctuary laughed at this suggestion and said, “Oakley hates me.” After watching me coo and snuggle with Oakley, he approached Oakley, only to get  open-mouthed gesture that said, “Come any closer and I’ll bite you.” There’s a lot of talk at the sanctuary about bird’s people preferences. There have been many experiments that show how birds recognize individuals of their own species. However about whether birds can recognize individuals of other species too, including humans. An experiment was done where pigeons were trained to identify familiar and unfamiliar objects. When shown a familiar and unfamiliar human faces, they recognized the familiar one. Similarly, researchers at the University of Washington in Seattle showed how crows who had been captured and banded by an people wearing a certain mask only responded when they were passed by people wearing that same mask. In Antarctica, researchers discovered that birds living there only attacked individual people who had disturbed their nests before, not individuals who had never bother them. Given these studies, given that come parrots can live up to 90 years, are social and monogamous, and given what I’ve observed while volunteering at a parrot sanctuary, it seems pretty clear that parrots recognize individual humans. Anyone who has a parrot can attest that that parrot recognizes them. Birds can see into the UV spectrum. They see different colors than we do because they have four cones in their eyes instead of three. They also have a wider perspective since their eyes are not at the front of their head like ours. And supposedly while we see seamless moving images at 50 frames per second birds see 100 light pulse cycles per second. I wonder how individual parrots see individual humans. I wonder what they they see about us that we cannot see about ourselves. 


The parrots at the sanctuary, like all parrots, are quite particular about who they like and who they don’t and I wonder what it is about people they don’t like. Everyone has their theories. Some volunteers tend to say that certain parrots have preferences for humans of particular genders, based on their experience, their previous owners, etc. Other folks think it’s totally random. I’m curious if there’s a logic to it that we just literally can’t see.





